KEP-5018: DRA: AdminAccess for ResourceClaims and ResourceClaimTemplates (#5019)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-node/5018-dra-adminaccess/README.md

### Goals

- Provide a privileged mode for cluster administrators to access devices already
  in use.

- Ensure that only authorized users can use the privileged mode.

- Maintain security and prevent unauthorized access to devices.

### Non-Goals

- Redesign DRA.

- Extend privileged mode access to non-admin users.

- Define how administrators use the data accessed through privileged mode.

- Define which specific additional permissions are enabled by DRA drivers when
  this privileged mode is used.

## Proposal

### DRAAdminAccess Overview

This proposal enhances the `DRAAdminAccess` feature to enable cluster
administrators to mark requests in `ResourceClaim` and `ResourceClaimTemplate`
objects as privileged. This feature includes:

1. Admin Access Flag:

   A field in `ResourceClaim` and `ResourceClaimTemplate` specifications to
   indicate the request is in admin mode.

   Example:

   ```yaml
   apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1beta1
   kind: ResourceClaim
   metadata:
     name: admin-resource-claim
     namespace: admin-namespace
   spec:
     resourceClassName: admin-resource-class
     adminAccess: true
   ```

> 1. Namespace Label for DRA Admin Mode:

Reviewer: it would be helpful to list out the assumptions / limitations of the "label namespace to give access" approach

1. assumption: it is not important to subdivide admin access to different types of devices
2. assumption: ability to label (or relabel) namespaces is not granted to low-privileged namespace-constrained users

   Namespaces must be labeled to allow the creation of admin-access claims.

   Example label:

   ```yaml
   metadata:
     labels:
       kubernetes.io/dra-admin-access: "true"
   ```

1. Authorization Check:

>    In the REST storage layer, validate requests to create `ResourceClaim` or

Reviewer 2: You either have to also handle `update` or make the object immutable.  Either way, it should be described here.

   `ResourceClaimTemplate` objects with `adminAccess: true`. Only authorize if
   namespace has the `kubernetes.io/dra-admin-access` label.

1. Grants privileged access to the requested device:

   For requests with `adminAccess: true`, the scheduler bypasses standard
   allocation checks and allows administrators to access devices already in use.
   This ensures privileged tasks like monitoring or diagnostics can be performed
   without disrupting existing allocations.

1. No impact on availability of claims:

   The scheduler ignores claims with `adminAccess: true`, normal usage is not
   impacted as claims in other namespaces can still be allocated using the same
   devices that are also accessed by workloads in the admin namespace.

### Workflow

1. A cluster administrator labels an admin namespace with
   `kubernetes.io/dra-admin-access`.

1. Only authorized users can create `ResourceClaim` or `ResourceClaimTemplate`

>    objects with `adminAccess: true` in this admin namespace.

Reviewer 2: The wording is odd here, I think this is trying to say that "users who are authorized to create claims in this admin namespace can set the adminAccess bool if they want to"

1. Only users with access to the admin namespace can reference these
   `ResourceClaims` or `ResourceClaimTemplates` in their pod or deployment
   specs.

1. The DRA controller processes the request and grants privileged access to the
   requested device.

## Design Details

### API Changes

> The `adminAccess` field in `DeviceRequest` was added to `ResourceClaim` and

Reviewer 2: A mermaid diagram that shows how this `bool` flows through the entire stack would be helpful.

`ResourceClaimTemplate` in Kubernetes v1.31:

```go
// DeviceRequest is a request for devices required for a claim.
// This is typically a request for a single resource like a device, but can
// also ask for several identical devices.
//
// A DeviceClassName is currently required. Clients must check that it is
// indeed set. It's absence indicates that something changed in a way that
// is not supported by the client yet, in which case it must refuse to
// handle the request.
type DeviceRequest struct {
	...

    // AdminAccess indicates that this is a claim for administrative access
    // to the device(s). Claims with AdminAccess are expected to be used for
    // monitoring or other management services for a device.  They ignore
    // all ordinary claims to the device with respect to access modes and
    // any resource allocations.
    //
    // This is an alpha field and requires enabling the DRAAdminAccess
    // feature gate. Admin access is disabled if this field is unset or
    // set to false, otherwise it is enabled.
    //
    // +optional
    // +featureGate=DRAAdminAccess

>     AdminAccess *bool

Reviewer 3: Reading this doc, we seem to refer to "AdminAccess" as privileged for most of this doc. Have we considered just using Privileged instead of AdminAccess?

Reviewer 4: I think it came up. If there's consensus that "Privileged" has clear advantages, then we have an opportunity to rename in 1.33 because we are doing a v1beta2 where we can use the new field name. We also would need to rename the KEP and feature gate or accept some inconsistency.

Author: IMO AdminAccess is better because it signals this field is meant for admins to use and manage, not just any privileged user on the cluster and should be used with caution.

Reviewer 3: Looking at other examples in our pod API we do seem to use privileged: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/staging/src/k8s.io/api/core/v1/types.go#L7704-#L7709

Author: AFAIK There’s nothing in-tree that prevents securityContext privileged from being set by non-admins. It can be gated by using PSA labels or VAP or policy webhooks. IMO “adminAccess” signals that this is an admin field and can only be used in an admin namespace. I don’t think the privileged field has the same effect. 

and if we were to rename the field now, do we need to support both old and new at the same time before we remove the old one in a future release? seems like extra complexity we need to maintain. 

Do we have consensus to rename? thoughts? @enj @liggitt @deads2k @pohly

Reviewer 4: I prefer to not rename.

}
```

Admin access to devices is a privileged operation because it grants users access
to devices that are in use by other users. Drivers might also remove other
restrictions when preparing the device.

In Kubernetes 1.31 (before this KEP was introduced), an example validating
admission policy
[was provided](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/4aeaf1e99e82da8334c0d6dddd848a194cd44b4f/test/e2e/dra/test-driver/deploy/example/admin-access-policy.yaml#L1-L11)
which restricted access to this option. It was formerly the responsibility of
cluster admins to ensure that such a policy was installed if the cluster
shouldn't have allowed unrestricted access.

Starting in Kubernetes 1.33 (when this KEP was introduced), a validation has
been added to the REST storage layer to only authorize `ResourceClaim` or
`ResourceClaimTemplate` with `adminAccess: true` requests if their namespace has
the `kubernetes.io/dra-admin-access` label to only allow it for users with
additional privileges. More time is needed to figure out how that should work,

> therefore the field is placed behind the `DRAAdminAccess` feature gate.

Reviewer 2: This makes it sound like there is some other high authz check happening outside of the label.

The `DRAAdminAccess` feature gate controls whether users can set the
`adminAccess` field to true when requesting devices. That is checked in the
apiserver. In addition, the scheduler will not allocate claims with admin access

> when the feature is turned off. This covers the scenario that the field might

Reviewer 2: Perhaps the scheduler should check for the label as well?

Reviewer: eh, letting the consumers just look at the boolean seems ok to me

### REST Storage Changes

In both pkg/registry/resource/resourceclaim/strategy.go and
pkg/registry/resource/resourceclaimtemplate/strategy.go, update `Validate` and
`ValidateUpdate` to call a new `authorizedForAdmin` function to check if the
request is authorized to set the `adminAccess` field to devices based on the DRA
admin namespace label.

### Kube-controller-manager Changes

// TODO: what part of claim.Status.Allocation should be updated? e.g.
AdminAccess is part of `DeviceRequestAllocationResult` but need to set it for
each device?

In pkg/controller/resourceclaim/controller.go, process requests in `handleClaim`
function to prevent creation of `ResourceClaim` when the `ResourceClaimTemplate`
has the `adminAccess` field while the feature gate is turned off.

### Kube-scheduler Changes

In pkg/scheduler/framework/plugins/dynamicresources/allocateddevices.go, handle
claims with `adminAccess` to ensure devices allocated with `adminAccess` are
skipped without invoking the callback bypassing standard allocation checks.

### ResourceQuota

Requests asking for `adminAccess` contribute to the quota. We recommend that
these administrator namespaces should not have quotas configured.

> 

Reviewer 3: Two areas I am curious on.

Area 1: 
  Resource Quota and Kueue are very similar in this regard. I guess for Kueue one could ignore the count of devices coming from adminAccess resource claims.
  Is there any upper limit of the number of requests to a GPU than people could do? I wonder if it would be possible to have too many admin requests to a GPU and that would block the user's workload?
  
  Area 2:
  
  Is there any impact to autoscaling for adminAccess?

Reviewer 4: > Area 1

Other components like Kueue should indeed follow the same resource tracking logic and ignore admin access when considering resource needs.

Because this is a privileged feature, the assumption is that admins use this judiciously and don't overload the system.

> Area 2

Same as with Kueue: resource tracking must consider it. The Cluster Autoscaler gets that for free by using the in-tree code.

Reviewer 3: Accessing accelerators is always resource constrained. Given that our stance is that we should not use resource tracking for ResourceQuota/Kueue/Autoscaling, I am concerned that someone could use this path to get around typical resource quota requests.

I see that the scope of this is to access existing devices. Is there anything in place to make sure that the device is used? I worry that this could be used to potentially abuse access to devices if scheduler/kueue/resourcequota are bypassed but there are no restrictions in place to make sure that there is a request to this device already.

Reviewer 4: > Accessing accelerators is always resource constrained. Given that our stance is that we should not use resource tracking for ResourceQuota/Kueue/Autoscaling, I am concerned that someone could use this path to get around typical resource quota requests.

But they would need privileged access to the cluster to do that. Are we really worried about people with admin rights abusing the cluster?

> Is there anything in place to make sure that the device is used? 

No. Why should it have to be in use? There's nothing wrong with collecting information about idle devices.

Reviewer 3: I don't think my concerns are for alpha so it shouldn't block this.

I am mostly worried for autoscaling users being able to access new GPUS and we are essentially dropping kube protections. But we would have cloud/physical quota limits to guard against something accessing GPUs nodes if they are not actually allowed.

extending the production code to implement this enhancement.
- `<package>`: `<date>` - `<test coverage>`
-->

Start of v1.33 development cycle (v1.33.0-alpha.1-):

- `k8s.io/kubernetes/pkg/registry/resource/resourceclaim`: %
- `k8s.io/kubernetes/pkg/registry/resource/resourceclaimtemplate`: %

##### Integration tests

<!--
This question should be filled when targeting a release.
For Alpha, describe what tests will be added to ensure proper quality of the enhancement.

For Beta and GA, add links to added tests together with links to k8s-triage for those tests:
https://storage.googleapis.com/k8s-triage/index.html
-->

##### e2e tests

<!--
This question should be filled when targeting a release.
For Alpha, describe what tests will be added to ensure proper quality of the enhancement.

For Beta and GA, add links to added tests together with links to k8s-triage for those tests:
https://storage.googleapis.com/k8s-triage/index.html

We expect no non-infra related flakes in the last month as a GA graduation criteria.
-->

End-to-end testing depends on a working resource driver and a container runtime
with CDI support. A

> [test driver](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/tree/master/test/e2e/dra/test-driver)

Reviewer 3: @pohly do we want to ask for implementations in the kubernetes-sigs/dra-example-driver? Or is that best effort in the context of the KEP process?

Reviewer 4: That is a good criteria for beta graduation, but not for E2E testing.

  https://testgrid.k8s.io/sig-node-dynamic-resource-allocation#ci-kind-dra

Kubernetes e2e suite.[It] [sig-node] DRA [Feature:DynamicResourceAllocation]
[FeatureGate:DynamicResourceAllocation] [Beta] cluster validate
ResourceClaimTemplate and ResourceClaim for admin access
[Feature:DRAAdminAccess] [FeatureGate:DRAAdminAccess] [Alpha]
[FeatureGate:DynamicResourceAllocation] [Beta]

### Graduation Criteria

#### Alpha

- Feature implemented behind a feature flag
- Initial e2e tests completed and enabled

#### Beta

- Gather feedback
- Additional tests are in Testgrid and linked in KEP

#### GA

- Allowing time for feedback

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

The usual Kubernetes upgrade and downgrade strategy applies for in-tree
components.

### Version Skew Strategy

This feature affects the kube-apiserver, kube-controller-manager, and
kube-scheduler. The kube-apiserver must validate requests containing
`adminAccess: true` regardless of the version of other components. The
kube-controller-manager and kube-scheduler should ignore `adminAccess: true` if
they are at an older version that does not support it and process the field only
if the feature gate is detected.

> ## Production Readiness Review Questionnaire

Reviewer 2: I recommend answering these questions now since you have an existing beta feature that is interacting with this alpha feature.

Author: @enj are there specific sections in https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/5019/files#diff-ae2e6ccce4874b6f2b03bd657e31957f1a6706ab197d736517d82f41220526b3R414-R669 that you recommend addressing before this is alpha?

### Feature Enablement and Rollback

###### How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?

> - [x] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)

Reviewer 3: Given that DRAAdminAccess is dependent on DRAStuctured parameters, should we mention that here for disablement?

If someone disables the feature gate for DRAStructured parameters, does it make sense for this feature gate to be on?

Reviewer 4: It doesn't do anything in that case, but let's allow such a configuration.

We used to have a sanity check where the apiserver refused to start when DRAAdminAccess was enabled and DynamicResourceAllocation was disabled. That broke clusters using `AllAlpha=true` (a reasonable setup, used by the generic "alpha" kind job) because then DRAAdminAccess is enabled while DynamicResourceAllocation is disabled (default off!).

Reviewer 3: @ritazh One thing I am unclear on for this KEP is does it really make sense to promote StructuredParameters to GA without this KEP?

This seems to read as a good feature to have for more security conscious organizations but if StructuredParameters goes GA while this feature is in Alpha (or Beta) then we can potentially support a less than ideal scenario for a security minded organization.

Reviewer 4: If this feature is disabled, then there is no concern about security because the functionality which needs the additional privileges (admin access) is also disabled.

      how can an operator troubleshoot without logging into a master or worker node?
    - Mitigations: What can be done to stop the bleeding, especially for already
      running user workloads?
    - Diagnostics: What are the useful log messages and their required logging
      levels that could help debug the issue?
      Not required until feature graduated to beta.
    - Testing: Are there any tests for failure mode? If not, describe why.
-->

Will be considered for beta.

###### What steps should be taken if SLOs are not being met to determine the problem?

Will be considered for beta.

## Implementation History

- Kubernetes 1.33: KEP accepted as "provisional".

## Drawbacks

None.

## Alternatives

The following options were also considered:

- Validating Admission Policy (VAP): An example was added in 1.31. However this
  approach cannot be used to control access for an in-tree type because
  Kubernetes has no mechanism to apply a system VAP to all new clusters
  automatically and therefore it is not sufficient for conformance.
- Builtin admission controller: This is doable, but more work than the approach

>   described in this KEP.

Reviewer 2: It is not more work, just different work.  David's comment has better reasoning to why admission is not the preferred approach.

// handle the request.
type DeviceRequest struct {
	...

    // AdminAccess indicates that this is a claim for administrative access
    // to the device(s). Claims with AdminAccess are expected to be used for
    // monitoring or other management services for a device.  They ignore
    // all ordinary claims to the device with respect to access modes and
    // any resource allocations.
    //
    // This is an alpha field and requires enabling the DRAAdminAccess
    // feature gate. Admin access is disabled if this field is unset or
    // set to false, otherwise it is enabled.
    //
    // +optional
    // +featureGate=DRAAdminAccess
    AdminAccess *bool
}
```

Admin access to devices is a privileged operation because it grants users access
to devices that are in use by other users. Drivers might also remove other
restrictions when preparing the device.

In Kubernetes 1.31 (before this KEP was introduced), an example validating
admission policy
[was provided](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/4aeaf1e99e82da8334c0d6dddd848a194cd44b4f/test/e2e/dra/test-driver/deploy/example/admin-access-policy.yaml#L1-L11)

> which restricts access to this option. It is the responsibility of cluster

Reviewer 5: I think "It *was formerly* the responsibility of cluster admins to ensure that such a policy *was* installed if the cluster shouldn't have allowed unrestricted access" helps keep the past tense flow clear, in that we are describing the evolution of this feature.

> which restricts access to this option. It is the responsibility of cluster

Reviewer 5: s/which restricts/which restricted

The `DRAAdminAccess` feature gate controls whether users can set the
`adminAccess` field to true when requesting devices. That is checked in the
apiserver. In addition, the scheduler will not allocate claims with admin access
when the feature is turned off. This covers the scenario that the field might
have been set in Kubernetes v1.31 where the field was available uncondiionally
or while the feature was enabled.

### REST Storage Changes

In both pkg/registry/resource/resourceclaim/strategy.go and
pkg/registry/resource/resourceclaimtemplate/strategy.go, update `Validate` and
`ValidateUpdate` to call a new `authorizedForAdmin` function to check if the
request is authorized to set the `adminAccess` field to devices based on the DRA
admin namespace label.

### Kube-controller-manager Changes

In pkg/controller/resourceclaim/controller.go, process `ResourceClaim` in
`syncClaim` function to check for the `adminAccess` field and the feature gate
enablement to ensure the field can be set.

// TODO: what part of claim.Status.Allocation should be updated? e.g.
AdminAccess is part of `DeviceRequestAllocationResult` but need to set it for

> each device?

Author: @pohly any thoughts on this?

Reviewer 4: The [current API](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/c5c19a64877310d4350ada3bf2428654c8117888/staging/src/k8s.io/api/resource/v1beta1/types.go#L832-L842) is correct: the fact that admin access was used during allocation must be recorded for each device where that mode was applied.

Author: I will remove any mentions of syncClaim then. Is the device plugin expected to update AdminAccess for each applicable device in `DeviceRequestAllocationResult`?

Reviewer 4: The scheduler sets `DeviceRequestAllocationResult.AdminAccess` when it allocates a claim. A DRA driver reads that field.

"device plugin" is a different kind of kubelet plugin, not something that is used by DRA.

  this privileged mode is used.

## Proposal

### DRAAdminAccess Overview

This proposal enhances the `DRAAdminAccess` feature to enable cluster
administrators to mark requests in `ResourceClaim` and `ResourceClaimTemplate`
objects as privileged. This feature includes:

1. Admin Access Flag:

   A field in `ResourceClaim` and `ResourceClaimTemplate` specifications to
   indicate the request is in admin mode.

   Example:

   ```yaml
   apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1beta1
   kind: ResourceClaim
   metadata:
     name: admin-resource-claim
     namespace: admin-namespace
   spec:
     resourceClassName: admin-resource-class
     adminAccess: true
   ```

1. Namespace Label for DRA Admin Mode:

   Namespaces must be labeled to allow the creation of admin-access claims.

   Example label:

   ```yaml
   metadata:
     labels:
       kubernetes.io/dra-admin-access: "true"
   ```

1. Authorization Check:

   In the REST storage layer, validate requests to create `ResourceClaim` or
   `ResourceClaimTemplate` objects with `adminAccess: true`. Only authorize if
   namespace has the `kubernetes.io/dra-admin-access` label.

1. Grants privileged access to the requested device:

>    For requests with `adminAccess: true`, the DRA controller bypasses standard

Reviewer 4: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/5019#discussion_r1907142420

   allocation checks and allows administrators to access devices already in use.
   This ensures privileged tasks like monitoring or diagnostics can be performed

>    without disrupting existing allocations. The controller also logs and audits

Reviewer 4: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/5019#discussion_r1907144719

  - [ ] (R) Minimum Two Week Window for GA e2e tests to prove flake free
- [ ] (R) Graduation criteria is in place
  - [ ] (R) [all GA Endpoints](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/pull/1806) must be hit by [Conformance Tests](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md) 
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review completed
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review approved
- [x] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

<!--
**Note:** This checklist is iterative and should be reviewed and updated every time this enhancement is being considered for a milestone.
-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

> As the Dynamic Resource Allocation (DRA) feature evolves, cluster administrators require a privileged mode to grant access to devices already in use by other users. This feature, referred to as DRAAdminAccess, allows administrators to perform tasks such as monitoring device health or status while maintaining device security and integrity.

Reviewer 5: should we distinguish between "adminstrators" and "regular users" here to clarify that the security story? like "This feature, referred to as DRAAdminAccess, allows administrators to perform tasks such as monitoring device health or status across all devices while ensuring that regular uses only have access to run containers on the devices their workloads are scheduled onto." ?

> This KEP proposes a mechanism for cluster administrators to mark a request in a ResourceClaim or ResourceClaimTemplate with an admin access flag. This flag allows privileged access to devices, enabling administrative tasks without compromising security. Access to this mode is restricted to users authorized to create ResourceClaim or ResourceClaimTemplate objects in namespaces marked with the DRA admin label, ensuring that non-administrative users cannot misuse this feature.

Reviewer 5: Is "without compromising security" too strong here? Is it more correct to say something like "This flag allows conditional, privileged access to devices. Conditional access to this mode is restricted..."

## Motivation

> 

Reviewer 4: To be honest, I don't know how "normal" permissions are "normally" (sorry, couldn't resist) defined. I assumed that this would be handled by admins or cloud providers.

But if we have sane upstream defaults, then yes, those should have been modified as part of core DRA.

> 

Author: I will follow up on this.

> 

Author: @pohly @liggitt pls review: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/130738

The current Dynamic Resource Allocation (DRA) feature enables users to request resources but lacks a mechanism for cluster administrators to gain privileged access to devices already in use by other users. This limitation restricts administrators from performing tasks like:

* Monitoring device health or status.

* Performing diagnostics and troubleshooting on devices shared across users.

Enabling such administrative tasks without compromising security is critical to cluster operations. Non-admin users gaining access to devices in use by others could result in:

* Unauthorized access to confidential information about device usage.

* Potential conflicts or misuse of shared hardware.

> As the adoption of DRA expands, the lack of privileged administrative access becomes a bottleneck for cluster operations, particularly in shared environments where devices are critical resources.

Reviewer 5: "As the adoption of DRA expands, the inability of administrators to perform privileged device introspection becomes a bottlenect for cluster operations,..."

Something like the above gets rid of the word "access", which may be confusing ("lack of privileged admistrative access" is usually something we are trying to ensure! 😄)

### Goals

* Provide a privileged mode for cluster administrators to access devices already in use.

* Ensure that only authorized users can use the privileged mode.

* Maintain security and prevent unauthorized access to devices.

* Allow administrators to mark `ResourceClaim` or `ResourceClaimTemplate` objects with an admin access flag in namespaces marked with the DRA admin label.

### Non-Goals

* Redesign DRA.

* Extend privileged mode access to non-admin users.

* Define how administrators use the data accessed through privileged mode.

## Proposal

### DRAAdminAccess Overview

This proposal enhances the `DRAAdminAccess` feature to enable cluster administrators to mark requests in `ResourceClaim` and `ResourceClaimTemplate` objects as privileged. This feature includes:

1. Admin Access Flag:

    A field in `ResourceClaim` and `ResourceClaimTemplate` specifications to indicate the request is in admin mode.

    Example:
    ```yaml
    apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1beta1
    kind: ResourceClaim
    metadata:
      name: admin-resource-claim
      namespace: admin-namespace
    spec:
      resourceClassName: admin-resource-class
      adminAccess: true
    ```

> 1. Namespace Label for DRA Admin Mode:

Reviewer 5: As specified (thus far, I haven't yet read the whole doc 😛) it seems that labelded namespace creation must happen before the DRA resources can refer to `adminAccess: true`. Should we put this step as the first step in this overview to reflect its serial place in the required order?

Reviewer 5: I see in the workflow doc below that you describe the create namespace as the first step, so this comment is less important.

    Namespaces must be labeled to allow the creation of admin-access claims.

    Example label:
    ```yaml
    metadata:
      labels:
        kubernetes.io/dra-admin-access: "true"
    ```
1. Authorization Check:

>     In the REST storage layer, validate requests to create `ResourceClaim` or `ResourceClaimTemplate` objects with `adminAccess: true`. Only authorize if namespace has the `kubernetes.io/dra-admin-access` label.

Reviewer 4: @ritazh, you had mentioned earlier that there is prior art for doing this at the REST layer when I asked the same question for your prototype. Where is that prior art?

If we keep doing it as proposed now, that probably belongs into the KEP.

>     In the REST storage layer, validate requests to create `ResourceClaim` or `ResourceClaimTemplate` objects with `adminAccess: true`. Only authorize if namespace has the `kubernetes.io/dra-admin-access` label.

Author: I think this is one example https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/registry/rbac/escalation_check.go#L100-L101

>     In the REST storage layer, validate requests to create `ResourceClaim` or `ResourceClaimTemplate` objects with `adminAccess: true`. Only authorize if namespace has the `kubernetes.io/dra-admin-access` label.

Reviewer 2: It was my recommendation to use the REST storage layer and not admission, because this isn't something that I think a cluster admin should be able to disable.  The cluster admin can make it so that anyone can apply labels to namespaces, but they can't prevent the check from running.  In the same way that the RBAC escalation checks cannot be disabled, but the cluster admin is free to grant authorization to all users to meet those checks.

The authz logic for `AllowUnsafeMalformedObjectDeletion` could have been implemented in admission, but it instead lives in the REST handler where it cannot be disabled.

Perhaps @deads2k has opinions.

>     In the REST storage layer, validate requests to create `ResourceClaim` or `ResourceClaimTemplate` objects with `adminAccess: true`. Only authorize if namespace has the `kubernetes.io/dra-admin-access` label.

Reviewer 6: Authorization prior art and benefits.  We have previously directly wired REST storage to make secondary authorization checks.  The first was probably the RBAC covers check which uses a authorization check for binding permissions.  We did another check for the all resource-wide delete-corrupted check.  In cases like those, the permissions checks are not optional, but the permissions themselves can be granted as broadly as a cluster-admin would like.

This leaves the control in the hands of the cluster-admin via permissions and allows the cluster-admin to delegate the control if he likes.  Having a second layer of control to entirely remove a check (admission) doesn't seem useful in this case.

In this case, I don't know that I would compare this directly to authorization since the dependency is on the state of another resource.  We've also done this in endpoints like pods/eviction where we reach across from one API group's resource to another's to make a decision.

I prefer using the REST handler because
1. this is new functionality for a new resource. Unlike pods, we don't have to worry about backwards compatibility and the associated opt-in flow
2. the difficulties in auditing cluster with PSA and predicting behavior when the configuration of the admission plugins is opaque is a situation I'd prefer to avoid repeating
3. the inability of the cluster-admin to delegate the power to other users exists regardless of the mechanism of enforcement.
4. every cluster will have the same behavior

>     In the REST storage layer, validate requests to create `ResourceClaim` or `ResourceClaimTemplate` objects with `adminAccess: true`. Only authorize if namespace has the `kubernetes.io/dra-admin-access` label.

Reviewer: @deads2k are you suggesting doing this in the REST layer _and_ switching the approach to use an authorization check, or just checking the namespace label in the REST layer?

>     In the REST storage layer, validate requests to create `ResourceClaim` or `ResourceClaimTemplate` objects with `adminAccess: true`. Only authorize if namespace has the `kubernetes.io/dra-admin-access` label.

Reviewer 6: I think checking the namespace in the REST layer is appropriate for what we're controlling on a new API surface.

>     In the REST storage layer, validate requests to create `ResourceClaim` or `ResourceClaimTemplate` objects with `adminAccess: true`. Only authorize if namespace has the `kubernetes.io/dra-admin-access` label.

Reviewer: ok

1. Grants privileged access to the requested device:

>     For requests with `adminAccess: true`, the DRA controller bypasses standard allocation checks and allows administrators to access devices already in use. This ensures privileged tasks like monitoring or diagnostics can be performed without disrupting existing allocations. The controller also logs and audits admin-access requests for security and traceability.

Reviewer 5: Is there an assumption that monitoring/diagnostics processes are already running on the underlying host OS, and so any CPU/memory allocation can be guaranteed? And/or do we assume that any new operational headroom required by these privileged tasks is already pre-accounted for, no chance for container allocation to take up 100% of the available headroom of a node's host OS?

Reviewer 4: This field does not influence CPU or memory consumption. Those monitoring pods must declare their resources and they will get set aside for them when the pods get scheduled.

>     For requests with `adminAccess: true`, the DRA controller bypasses standard allocation checks and allows administrators to access devices already in use. This ensures privileged tasks like monitoring or diagnostics can be performed without disrupting existing allocations. The controller also logs and audits admin-access requests for security and traceability.

Author: @pohly should this be `both DRA controller and the scheduler bypasses standard allocation checks` since in pkg/controller/resourceclaim/controller.go, `ResourceClaim` is processed in
`syncClaim` function to check for the `adminAccess` field and bypass allocation
checks if `adminAccess: true` and in pkg/scheduler/framework/plugins/dynamicresources/allocateddevices.go, foreachAllocatedDevice handles
claims with AdminAccess and skips them.

>     For requests with `adminAccess: true`, the DRA controller bypasses standard allocation checks and allows administrators to access devices already in use. This ensures privileged tasks like monitoring or diagnostics can be performed without disrupting existing allocations. The controller also logs and audits admin-access requests for security and traceability.

Author: This refers to syncClaim in pkg/controller/resourceclaim/controller.go. e.g. 
```go
if adminRequested {
		logger.V(5).Info("ResourceClaim", klog.KRef(claim.Namespace, claim.Name), "has admin access, bypass standard allocation checks")
		claim.Status.Allocation = &resourceapi.AllocationResult{}
		return nil
	}
```

>     For requests with `adminAccess: true`, the DRA controller bypasses standard allocation checks and allows administrators to access devices already in use. This ensures privileged tasks like monitoring or diagnostics can be performed without disrupting existing allocations. The controller also logs and audits admin-access requests for security and traceability.

Reviewer 4: What you describe here ("bypasses standard allocation checks") is what happens in the scheduler.

The controller only checks for the field and the feature gate enablement to determine whether it should create a ResourceClaim with that field set. This is not for security (if the ResourceClaimTemplate has the field set, using the feature was allowed), but for preventing usage of it once it got turned off again.

>     For requests with `adminAccess: true`, the DRA controller bypasses standard allocation checks and allows administrators to access devices already in use. This ensures privileged tasks like monitoring or diagnostics can be performed without disrupting existing allocations. The controller also logs and audits admin-access requests for security and traceability.

Reviewer 4: I'm not sure whether that qualifies for "audits admin-access requests for security and traceability".

This is `V(5)` and meant for debugging. If the expectation is that a cluster admin can get some kind of audit log in a production cluster, we need some other mechanism.

1. No impact on availability of claims:

>     The scheduler ignores claims with `adminAccess: true`, normal usage is not impacted as claims in other namespaces can still be allocated using the same devices that are also accessed by workloads in the admin namespace.

Reviewer 5: Does this assume that privileged tasks are either (1) not using the specialized hardware (e.g., GPU) or (2) are using specialized hardware in a cooperative way that is non-invasive to assumptions that kubernetes workloads have? For example, if my workload declares `expression: "device.attributes['gpu.nvidia.com'].profile == '1g.10gb'"` then I expect to be able to use the entire 10GB of that single GPU. What happens if my k8s workload container needs all 10GB and the entire GPU processing while a privileged task simultaneously has access to that GPU+memory?

Reviewer 4: > I imagine some device eventually may come along that requires exclusive access (i.e. no other allocated claims) for some specific admin task. Could that work if an admin creates two requests in a claim: where one has adminAccess: true and another that allocates the entire device?

Yes, that should work.

> Overall I think the idea that a ResourceClaim isn't claiming any resources in this case is a little confusing.

The idea behind this is that the admin workload does not interfere with the application workload. If that cannot be supported (hardware restrictions, admin workload too demanding), then admins have to do something else, like requesting exclusive access as you suggested above.

> What if a GPU DRA driver also declared a "metrics" device alongside partitions like MIGs, where that "metrics" device would be marked as requiring admin access somehow in the ResourceSlice?

That doubles the size of the information in the slices and it's not immediately obvious how that is different than requesting admin access to the same device as a normal workload.

### Workflow

1. A cluster administrator labels a namespace with `kubernetes.io/dra-admin-access`.

> 1. Authorized users create `ResourceClaim` or `ResourceClaimTemplate` objects with `adminAccess: true`.

Reviewer 5: I think we want to be clear that the `ResourceClaim` or  `ResourceClaimTemplate` needs to be created in the admin namespace.

1. Only users with access to the admin namespace can use them in their pod spec.

1. The DRA controller processes the request and grants privileged access to the requested device.

## Design Details

### API Changes

> Add `adminAccess` field to `DeviceRequest` which is part of `ResourceClaim` and `ResourceClaimTemplate`:

Reviewer 4: Yes.

```suggestion
The `adminAccess` field to `DeviceRequest` was added to `ResourceClaim` and `ResourceClaimTemplate` in Kubernetes 1.31:
```

```go

> // DeviceRequest is a request for devices required for a claim.

Reviewer 4: Let's shorten this section. There's no need to repeat the full struct, just show the relevant part:
```
type DeviceRequest struct {
    ...

    // AdminAccess indicates that this is a claim for administrative access
    // to the device(s). Claims with AdminAccess are expected to be used for
    // monitoring or other management services for a device.  They ignore
    // all ordinary claims to the device with respect to access modes and
    // any resource allocations.
    //
    // This is an alpha field and requires enabling the DRAAdminAccess
    // feature gate. Admin access is disabled if this field is unset or
    // set to false, otherwise it is enabled.
    //
    // +optional
    // +featureGate=DRAAdminAccess
    AdminAccess *bool
}
```

For consistency and readability:
- use four spaces instead of a tab for indention
- leave out the field tags

other restrictions when preparing the device. 

In Kubernetes 1.31 (before this KEP was introduced), an example validating admission policy [was
provided](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/4aeaf1e99e82da8334c0d6dddd848a194cd44b4f/test/e2e/dra/test-driver/deploy/example/admin-access-policy.yaml#L1-L11)
which restricts access to this option. It is the responsibility of cluster
admins to ensure that such a policy is installed if the cluster shouldn't allow
unrestricted access.

Starting in Kubernetes 1.33 (when this KEP was introduced), a validation has been added to the REST storage layer to only authorize `ResourceClaim` or `ResourceClaimTemplate` with `adminAccess: true` requests if their namespace has the `kubernetes.io/dra-admin-access` label to only allow it for users with additional privileges. More time is needed to
figure out how that should work, therefore the field is placed behind the `DRAAdminAccess` feature gate.

The `DRAAdminAccess` feature gate controls whether users can set the `adminAccess` field to
true when requesting devices. That is checked in the apiserver. In addition,
the scheduler will not allocate claims with admin access when the feature is

> turned off, or if the field was set prior to the feature gate was introduced (for example, set in 1.31 when it

Reviewer 5: I don't think I understand the "or if the field was set prior..." part.

> the scheduler will not allocate claims with admin access when the feature is
> turned off, or if the field was set prior to the feature gate was introduced (for example, set in 1.31 when it
> was available unconditionally, or if the field was set while the feature gate was enabled).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
the scheduler will not allocate claims with admin access when the feature is
turned off. This covers the scenario that the field might have been
set while running Kubernetes 1.31 where the field was available
unconditionally or while the feature was enabled.
```

A similar check in the kube-controller-manager prevents creating a
ResourceClaim when the ResourceClaimTemplate has the `adminAccess` field while the feature gate is turned off.

### REST Storage Changes

In both pkg/registry/resource/resourceclaim/strategy.go and pkg/registry/resource/resourceclaimtemplate/strategy.go, add the following to `Validate` and `ValidateUpdate`:

> ```go

Reviewer 4: I don't think we should have Go code in the KEP. Instead, describe what that code needs to do.

	// omitted

	for i := range template.Spec.Spec.Devices.Requests {
		value := template.Spec.Spec.Devices.Requests[i].AdminAccess
		if value != nil && *value {
			adminRequested = true
			break
		}
	}
	if !adminRequested {
		// No need to validate unless admin access is requested
		return allErrs
	}
	if namespaceRest == nil {
		return append(allErrs, field.Forbidden(field.NewPath(""), "namespace store is nil"))
	}

	namespaceName := template.Namespace
	// Retrieve the namespace object from the store
	obj, err := namespaceRest.Get(ctx, namespaceName, &metav1.GetOptions{ResourceVersion: "0"})
	if err != nil {
		return append(allErrs, field.Forbidden(field.NewPath(""), "namespace object cannot be retrieved"))
	}
	ns, ok := obj.(*core.Namespace)
	if !ok {
		return append(allErrs, field.Forbidden(field.NewPath(""), "namespace object is not of type core.Namespace"))
	}
	if value, exists := ns.Labels[DRAAdminNamespaceLabel]; !(exists && value == "true") {
		return append(allErrs, field.Forbidden(field.NewPath(""), "admin access to devices is not allowed in namespace without DRA Admin Access label"))
	}

	return allErrs
}
```

### Kube-controller-manager Changes

> In pkg/controller/resourceclaim/controller.go, process `ResourceClaim` in `syncClaim` function to check for the `adminAccess` field and bypass allocation checks if `adminAccess: true`.

Reviewer 4: Same here.

```go
func (ec *Controller) syncClaim(ctx context.Context, namespace, name string) error {
	logger := klog.LoggerWithValues(klog.FromContext(ctx), "claim", klog.KRef(namespace, name))
	ctx = klog.NewContext(ctx, logger)
	claim, err := ec.claimLister.ResourceClaims(namespace).Get(name)
	if err != nil {
		if apierrors.IsNotFound(err) {
			logger.V(5).Info("nothing to do for claim, it is gone")
			return nil
		}
		return err
	}
	adminRequested := false
	// Check for adminAccess flag
	for i := range claim.Spec.Devices.Requests {
		value := claim.Spec.Devices.Requests[i].AdminAccess
		if value != nil && *value {
			adminRequested = true
			break
		}
	}
	if adminRequested {

> 		logger.V(5).Info("ResourceClaim", klog.KRef(claim.Namespace, claim.Name), "has admin access, bypass standard allocation checks")

Reviewer 5: this is probably not the place for a code review 😜, but I'd want to see this at v=2

		ec.claimCache.Mutation(claim)
	}
  // omitted
	return nil
}

```

### Kube-scheduler Changes

In pkg/scheduler/framework/plugins/dynamicresources/allocateddevices.go, handle claims with AdminAccess:

```go
// foreachAllocatedDevice invokes the provided callback for each
// device in the claim's allocation result which was allocated
// exclusively for the claim.
//
// Devices allocated with admin access can be shared with other
// claims and are skipped without invoking the callback.
//
// foreachAllocatedDevice does nothing if the claim is not allocated.
func foreachAllocatedDevice(claim *resourceapi.ResourceClaim, cb func(deviceID structured.DeviceID)) {
	if claim.Status.Allocation == nil {
		return
	}
	for _, result := range claim.Status.Allocation.Devices.Results {
		if ptr.Deref(result.AdminAccess, false) {
			// Is not considered as allocated.
			continue
		}
		deviceID := structured.MakeDeviceID(result.Driver, result.Pool, result.Device)

		// None of the users of this helper need to abort iterating,
		// therefore it's not supported as it only would add overhead.
		cb(deviceID)
	}
}
```
### ResourceQuota

> Requests asking for `adminAccess` contribute to the quota. In practice,

Reviewer 5: Can we be more assertive with our language here? Because we are describing something new, we don't know what folks are yet doing in practice. Can we say that we don't recommend enforcing resource quotas or DRA AdminAccess namespaces based on the unique nature of how these workloads co-exist without competing for user resources?
